.. _indicator-15-3-1:

SDG Indicator 15.3.1
====================

As part of the "2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development", Sustainable 
Development Goal (SDG) 15 is to:

    "Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, 
    sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse 
    land degradation and halt biodiversity loss"

Each SDG has specific targets addressing different components, in this case, of 
life on land. Target 15.3 aims to:

    "By 2030, combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including 
    land affected by desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve 
    a land degradation-neutral world"

Indicators will be used then to assess the progress of each SDG target. In the 
case of SDG 15.3 the progress towards a land degradation neutral world will be 
assessed using indicator 15.3.1:

    "proportion of land that is degraded over total land area"

As the custodian agency for SDG 15.3, the United Nations Convention to Combat 
Desertification (UNCCD) has developed a `Good Practice Guidance (GPG) 
<http://www2.unccd.int/sites/default/files/relevant-links/2017-10/Good%20Practice%20Guidance_SDG%20Indicator%2015.3.1_Version%201.0.pdf>`_. 
providing recommendations on how to calculate SDG Indicator 15.3.1.

This document provides a brief introduction to SDG Indicator 15.3.1 and 
describes how each indicator is calculated by |trends.earth|.

In order to assess the area degraded, SDG Indicator 15.3.1 uses information 
from 3 sub-indicators:

#. Vegetation productivity
#. Land cover
#. Soil organic carbon

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/indicator_15_3_1.png
   :align: center

|trends.earth| allows the user to compute each of these subindicators in a 
spatially explicit way generating raster maps which are then integrated into a 
final SDG 15.3.1 indicator map and produces a table result reporting areas 
potentially improved and degraded for the area of analysis.
   
Sub-indicators
--------------

.. _indicator-productivity:

Productivity
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Land productivity is the biological productive capacity of the land, the source 
of all the food, fiber and fuel that sustains humans (United Nations 
Statistical Commission 2016). Net primary productivity (NPP) is the net amount 
of carbon assimilated after photosynthesis and autotrophic respiration over a 
given period of time (Clark et al. 2001) and is typically represented in units 
such as kg/ha/yr. NPP is a variable time consuming and costly to estimate, for 
that reason, we rely on remotely sensed information to derive indicators of 
NPP.

One of the most commonly used surrogates of NPP is the Normalized Difference 
Vegetation Index (NDVI), computed using information from the red and near 
infrared portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. In |trends.earth| we make 
use of bi-weekly products from MODIS and AVHRR to compute annual integrals of 
NDVI (computed as the mean annual NDVI for simplicity of interpretation of 
results). These annual integrals of NDVI are then used to compute each of the 
productivity indicators explained below.

Land productivity is assessed in |trends.earth| using three measures of change 
derived from NDVI time series data: trajectory, performance and state

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/indicator_15_3_1_prod_subindicators.png
   :align: center

.. _indicator-productivity-trajectory:
      
Productivity Trajectory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Trajectory measures the rate of change in primary productivity over time. As 
indicated in the figure below, |trends.earth| computes a linear regression at 
the pixel level to identify areas experiencing changes in primary productivity 
for the period under analysis. A Mann-Kendall non-paremetric significance test 
is then applied, considering only significant changes those that show a p-value 
≤ 0.05. Positive significant trends in NDVI would indicate potential 
improvement in land condition, and negative significant trends potential 
degradation.

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/lp_traj_flow.PNG
   :align: center

.. _indicator-productivity-climate-correction:

Correcting for the effects of climate
_____________________________________
   
Within a given ecosystem, primary productivity is affected by several factors, 
such as temperature, and the availability of light, nutrients and water. Of 
those, water availability is the most variable over time, and can have very 
significant influences in the amount of plant tissue produced every year. When 
annual integrals of NDVI are used to perform the trajectory analysis, it is 
important to interpret the results having historical precipitation information 
as a context. Otherwise, declining productivity trends could be identified as 
human caused land degradation, when they are driven by regional patterns of 
changes in water availability. 

|trends.earth| allows the user to perform different types of analysis to 
separate the climatic causes of the changes in primary productivity, from those 
which could be a consequence of human land use decisions on the ground. The 
methods currently supported for climate corrections are:

**Residual Trend Analysis (RESTREND):** RESTREND uses linear regression models 
to predict NDVI for a given rainfall amount. Trends in the difference between 
the predicted NDVI and the observed NDVI (the residual) are interpreted as 
non-climatically related productivity change. Please refer to the following 
citation more more details on the method and its limitations: `Wessels, K.J.; 
van den Bergh, F.; Scholes, R.J. Limits to detectability of land degradation by 
trend analysis of vegetation index data. Remote Sens. Environ. 2012, 125, 
10–22.` 

**Rain Use Efficiency (RUE):** RUE Is the ratio of annual NPP to annual 
precipitation. |trends.earth| uses the annual integrals of NDVI as a proxy for 
annual NPP, and offers the possibility of choosing among different 
precipitation products to compute RUE. After RUE is computed for each of the 
years under analysis, a linear regression and a non-parametric significance 
test is applied to the trend of RUE over time. Positive significant trends in 
RUE would indicate potential improvement in land condition, and negative 
significant trends potential degradation. Please refer to the following 
publication for details on the methods and its limitations: `Wessels, K.J.; 
Prince, S.D.; Malherbe, J.; Small, J.; Frost, P.E.; VanZyl, D. Can 
human-induced land degradation be distinguished from the effects of rainfall 
variability? A case study in South Africa. J. Arid Environ. 2007, 68, 271–297.`

**Water Use Efficiency (WUE):** RUE assumes that there is a linear relationship 
between the amount of water that falls in the form of precipitation in a 
particular place and the amount of water which will be actually used by the 
plants. This assumption does not hold true for every system. WUE tries to 
address this limitation by using total annual evapo-transpiration (ET) instead 
precipitation. ET is defined as precipitation minus the water lost to surface 
runoff, recharge to groundwater and changes to soil water storage. The rest of 
the analysis follows as described for RUE: a linear regression and a 
non-parametric significance test is applied to the trend of WUE over time. 
Positive significant trends in WUE would indicate potential improvement in land 
condition, and negative significant trends potential degradation.

The table below list the datasets available in |trends.earth| to perform NDVI 
trend analysis over time using the original NDVI data or with climatic 
corrections:

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/lp_traj_variables.PNG
   :align: center

.. _indicator-productivity-state:
      
Productivity State
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Productivity State indicator allows for the detection of recent changes in 
primary productivity as compared to a baseline period. The indicator is 
computed as follows:

1. Define the baseline period (historical period to which to compare recent 
   primary productivity).  

2. Define the comparison period (recent years used to compute comparison). It 
   is recommended to use a 3-year to avoid annual fluctuations related to 
   climate.  

3. For each pixel, use the annual integrals of NDVI for the baseline period to 
   compute a frequency distribution. In case the baseline period missed some 
   extreme values in NDVI, add 5% on both extremes of the distribution. That 
   expanded frequency distribution curve is then used to define the cut-off 
   values of the 10 percentile classes.   

4. Compute the mean NDVI for the baseline period, and determine the percentile 
   class it belongs to. Assign to the mean NDVI for the baseline period the 
   number corresponding to that percentile class. Possible values range from 1 
   (lowest class) to 10 (highest class).

5. Compute the mean NDVI for the comparison period, and determine the 
   percentile class it belongs to. Assign to the mean NDVI for the comparison 
   period the number corresponding to that percentile class. Possible values 
   range from 1 (lowest class) to 10 (highest class).

6. Determine the difference in class number between the comparison and the 
   baseline period (comparison minus baseline).

7. If the difference in class between the baseline and the comparison period is 
   ≤ 2, then that pixel could potentially be degraded. If the difference is ≥ 
   2, that pixel would indicate a recent improvement in terms of primary 
   productivity. Pixels with small changes are considered stable.

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/lp_state_flow.PNG
   :align: center

The table below list the datasets available in |trends.earth| to compute the 
Productivity State indicator:

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/lp_state_variables.PNG
   :align: center

.. _indicator-productivity-performance:
      
Productivity Performance
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Productivity Performance indicator measures local productivity relative to 
other similar vegetation types in similar land cover types or bioclimatic 
regions throughout the study area. |trends.earth| uses the unique combination 
of soil units (soil taxonomy units using USDA system provided by SoilGrids at 
250m resolution) and land cover (full 37 land cover classes provided by ESA CCI 
at 300m resolution) to define this areas of analysis. The indicator is computed 
as follows:

1. Define the analysis period, and use the time series of NDVI to compute mean 
   the NDVI for each pixel.

2. Define similar ecologically similar units as the unique intersection of land 
   cover and soil type.

3. For each unit, extract all the mean NDVI values computed in step 1, and 
   create a frequency distribution. From this distribution determine the value 
   which represents the 90th   percentile (we don't recommend using the 
   absolute maximum NDVI value to avoid possible errors due to the presence of 
   outliers). The value representing the 90th percentile will be considered the 
   maximum productivity for that unit.

4. Compute the ratio of mean NDVI and maximum productivity (in each case 
   compare the mean observed value to the maximum for its corresponding unit).

5. If observed mean NDVI is lower than 50% than the maximum productivity, that 
   pixel is considered potentially degraded for this indicator.

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/lp_perf_flow.PNG
   :align: center
   
The table below list the datasets available in |trends.earth| to compute the 
Productivity Performance indicator:
 
.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/lp_perf_variables.PNG
   :align: center

.. _indicator-15-3-1-combining-indicators:

Combining Productivity Indicators
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The three productivity sub-indicators are then combined as indicated in the 
tables below. For SDG 15.3.1 reporting, the 3-class indicator is required, but 
|trends.earth| also produces a 5-class one which takes advantage of the 
information provided by State to inform the type of degradation occurring in 
the area.

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/lp_aggregation.PNG
   :align: center

.. _indicator-land-cover:

Land cover
~~~~~~~~~~

To assess changes in land cover users need land cover maps covering the study 
area for the baseline and target years. These maps need to be of acceptable 
accuracy and created in such a way which allows for valid comparisons. 
|trends.earth| uses ESA CCI land cover maps as the default dataset, but local 
maps can also be used. The indicator is computed as follows:

#. Reclassify both land cover maps to the 7 land cover classes needed for 
   reporting to the UNCCD (forest, grassland, cropland, wetland, artificial 
   area, bare land and water). 

#. Perform a land cover transition analysis to identify which pixels remained 
   in the same land cover class, and which ones changed.

#. Based on your local knowledge of the conditions in the study area and the 
   land degradation processed occurring there, use the table below to identify 
   which transitions correspond to degradation (- sign), improvement (+ sign), 
   or no change in terms of land condition (zero).

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/lc_matrix.PNG
   :align: center

#. |trends.earth| will combine the information from the land cover maps and the 
   table of degradation typologies by land cover transition to compute the land 
   cover sub-indicator.

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/lc_flow.PNG
   :align: center

.. _indicator-soc:

Soil organic carbon
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The third sub-indicator for monitoring land degradation as part of the SDG 
process quantifies changes in soil organic carbon (SOC) over the reporting 
period. Changes in SOC are particularly difficult to assess for several 
reasons, some of them being the high spatial variability of soil properties, 
the time and cost intensiveness of conducting representative soil surveys and 
the lack of time series data on SOC for most regions of the world. To address 
some of the limitations, a combined land cover/SOC method is used in 
|trends.earth| to estimate changes in SOC and identify potentially degraded 
areas. The indicator is computed as follows:

1. Determine the SOC reference values. |trends.earth| uses SoilGrids 250m 
   carbon stocks for the first 30 cm of the soil profile as the reference 
   values for calculation (NOTE: SoilGrids uses information from a variety of 
   data sources and ranging from many years to produce this product, therefore 
   assigning a date for calculations purposes could cause inaccuracies in the 
   stock change calculations).

2. Reclassify the land cover maps to the 7 land cover classes needed for 
   reporting to the UNCCD (forest, grassland, cropland, wetland, artificial 
   area, bare land and water). Ideally annual land cover maps are preferred, 
   but at least land cover maps for the starting and end years are needed.

3. To estimate the changes in C stocks for the reporting period C conversion 
   coefficients for changes in land use, management and inputs are recommended 
   by the IPCC and the UNCCD. However, spatially explicit information on 
   management and C inputs is not available for most regions. As such, only 
   land use conversion coefficient can be applied for estimating changes in C 
   stocks (using land cover as a proxy for land use). The coefficients used 
   were the result of a literature review performed by the UNCCD and are 
   presented in the table below. Those coefficients represent the proportional 
   in C stocks after 20 years of land cover change.

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/soc_coeff.PNG
   :align: center

Changes in SOC are better studied for land cover transitions involving 
agriculture, and for that reason there is a different set of coefficients for 
each of the main global climatic regions: Temperate Dry (f = 0.80), Temperate 
Moist (f = 0.69), Tropical Dry (f = 0.58), Tropical Moist (f = 0.48), and 
Tropical Montane (f = 0.64).
   
4. Compute relative different in SOC between the baseline and the target 
   period, areas which experienced a loss in SOC of 10% of more during the 
   reporting period will be considered potentially degraded, and areas 
   experiencing a gain of 10% or more as potentially improved.
   
.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/soc.PNG
   :align: center

   
Combining indicators
--------------------

The integration of the three SDG 15.3.1 sub-indicators is done following the 
one-out all-out rule, this means that if an area was identified as potentially 
degraded by any of the sub-indicators, then that area will be considered 
potentially degraded for reporting purposes.

.. image:: /static/documentation/understanding_indicators15/sdg_aggregation.PNG
   :align: center


