General information
===================

|trends.earth| was produced as part of the project "Enabling the use of global
data sources to assess and monitor land degradation at multiple scales", funded
by the Global Environment Facility.

Contacting the team
-------------------

Contact the `Trends.Earth <mailto:trends.earth@conservation.org>`_ team with
any comments or suggestions. If you have specific bugs to report or
improvements to the tool that you would like to suggest, you can also submit
them in the `issue tracker on Github
<https://github.com/ConservationInternational/trends.earth/issues>`_ for
|trends.earth|.

Authors
-------

The Land Degradation Monitoring Project is a partnership of Conservation
International, Lund University, and the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), and is funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF).

Contributors to the documentation and to |trends.earth| include Yengoh Genesis,
Lennart Olsson, Mariano Gonzalez-Roglich, Monica Noon, Tristan Schnader, Anna
Tengberg, and Alex Zvoleff.

.. image:: /static/common/Logos_All_Partners.png
    :align: center
    :width: 600

|trends.earth| uses `Google Earth Engine <https://earthengine.google.com>`_ to
compute indicators in the cloud.

.. image:: /static/common/logo_earth_engine.png
    :align: center
    :width: 250
    :target: https://earthengine.google.com

Acknowledgements
----------------

The feedback provided by early users of |trends.earth| and by the participants
in the webinars and workshops held by the GEF Land Degradation Monitoring
Project have been critical to the development of the tool.

Neil Sims, Sasha Alexander, Renato Cumani, and Sara Minelli provided input on
the implementation of the SDG 15.3 and LDN indicators in |trends.earth|, on the
structure of the tool, and on the UNCCD reporting process, and also provided
early input and testing of the tool.

The project acknowledges the participants of the workshop held in Morogoro,
Tanzania in October, 2017 for sharing their feedback and suggestions on the
tool: Jones Agwata, Col. Papa Assane Ndiour, Lt. Fendama Baldé, Papa Nékhou
Diagne, Abdoul Aziz Diouf, Richard Alphonce Giliba, Moses Isabirye, Vettes
Kalema, Joseph Kihaule, Prof. D.N. Kimaro, James Lwasa, Paulo Mandela, Modou
Moustapha Sarr, Joseph Mutyaba, Stephen Muwaya, Joseph Mwalugelo, Prof.
Majaliwa Mwanjalolo, Edson Aspon Mwijage, Jerome Nchimbi, Elibariki Ngowi,
Tabby Njunge, Daniel Nkondola, Blaise Okinyi, Joseph Opio, Rozalia Rwegasira,
Ndeye Kany Sarr, Mamadou Adama Sarr, Edward Senyonjo, Olipa Simon, Samba Sow,
Felly Mugizi Tusiime and John Wasige.

Citation
--------

If you wish to cite |trends.earth|, please use the following citation:

Trends.Earth. Conservation International. Available online at:
`http://trends.earth <http://trends.earth>`_. 2018.

License
-------

|trends.earth| is free and open-source. It is licensed under the `GNU General
Public License, version 2.0 or later
<https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html>`_.

This site and the products of |trends.earth| are made available under the terms
of the `Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0>`_. The boundaries and names used,
and the designations used, in |trends.earth| do not imply official endorsement or
acceptance by Conservation International Foundation, or its partner
organizations and contributors.
